# RFC: The Next Level, or Discourse Categories
*by* porpoiseless
## Problem
Discourse categories in Ithkuil '11 provide a wealth of interesting
ideas. However, like the basic categories critiqued in [RFC
0001](RFC_0001.org), they suffer from non-orthogonality. 
## Duration
[2020-07-31 Fri]
## Current State
WIP Draft.
## Proposers
- @porpoiseless
## Detail
### What is meant by a 'discourse category'?
Conversation relates two logically distinct contexts:
1. the content or subject matter of our our conversation, and
2. the people involved in having the conversation; speaker and
   audience plus the performative, rhetorical or communicative actions
   performed between them.

I will call the former 'content level' and the latter 'discourse
level'. While persons and events might coincide between these two
levels, they are indeed very different and the grammar of Ithkuil's
successor should reflect this fact.

As an extreme example of overlap between the contexts, someone might
make a sandwich and narrate to themselves every step of the
process: "I slice some bread. I spread peanut butter on one slice and
jelly on another slice..."

In this case, the same individual is the subject spoken about at the
content level, and both speaker and audience at the discourse
level. The former is a description of something in the world, in this
case the activity of the speaker as they assemble a sandwich, while
the latter is simply a person talking to themselves. We can change the
discourse context independently, for instance by having the speaker
use the same series of utterances as a demonstration or tutorial of
how to make a sandwich.

If the two contexts share persons or events, they can be often
distinguished by time, modalization, and role. We often speak about
our past or possible future selves. For example, when giving a
command, "(You) spread peanut butter on the bread", the content is a
possible future state where the addressee is performing the named
action. The discourse level is an instruction or command.

Even if, as in our example of narrating the assembly of a sandwich,
there is no difference in time and modalization, we can make the
distinction that at the content level there is a sandwich maker, and
at the discourse level there is a speaker and a listener. The fact
that all three are the same person in no way diminishes our ability to
differentiate what that person is doing in each role (making a
sandwich, vs. speaking/listening).


## Proposal

### Restructure Illocution & add Expectation
##### Illocution: What does speech *do*?
The view I want to adopt here is that all language is performative:
every utterance *does something*.  Truth claims are only one kind of
speech act that happens to have received preferential treatment at the
hands of the logicians. But let us not be fooled: even a simple claim
like, "The sky is blue" entails a new fact about the world. Namely it
is now true that "I claim..." or "I judge that the sky as blue".

And these facts about what people claim to be true have important
consequences. It is on their basis that we call someone honest or
dishonest, well- or ill-informed, fair-minded or hypocritical, and so
on. Because we are committed to truth, and there is a whole system of
trust and consensus reality interwoven with it, it makes sense to mark
truth claims as a distinct category.

Illocution can only be used to indicate speech acts made in the first
person. I cannot, of instance, use Illocution to say, "Alice
instructed Bob to make a sandwich." For speech acts made by 2nd and
3rd persons, the language will require verbs for "warn", "promise",
"inform", "command", and so on. It is therefore sufficient to have
only two values for Illocution: Assertive and Performative. The former
marks truth claims and latter all other speech acts.

Consider these:

> "I warn you"+Assertive
> 
> "I warn you"+Performative

The first is a claim that presumes that some other sign or speech act
carries the warning, while the sentence merely asserts that warning
takes place. The second really is the warning. And having only two
values means an open class of verbs naming speech acts that may be
either mentioned (in Assertive sentences) or used (in Performative
sentences).

It may be helpful here to consider that a sentence like, "I warn
you..." seems like a speech act, while "I warn them..." is a claim. "I
warn them..." *cannot* be the same sentence the speaker used as a
warning—otherwise it would refer to the recipient of the command in
the 2nd person: "I warn *you*..."
#### Expectation
The category of Expectation marks what kind of response the speaker
desires from their audience. Broadly speaking, the three expectations
work as generalized versions of the classic trio of sentence purposes
in English (Declarative, Interrogative, and Imperative), and may also
be thought of as corresponding to an expected "channel" in which the
response will take place (as thought, speech, and action).

|                   | Cognitive   | Discursive    | Motive     |
| ----------------- | ----------- | ------------- | ---------- |
| intended response | thought     | speech        | action     |
| sentence purpose  | declarative | interrogative | imperative |

Expectation is not to be used for things like polite
"question-commands" or rhetorical questions: rather, it should mark
how the speaker actually intends their conversational partner to
respond. The reason for this is that the verbs naming speech acts
(which have replaced many of the Illocutions) can be used in tandem
with Expectation and Illocution to produce both direct and indirect
commands.

Speech acts like warnings and commands may be, but are not
necessarily, truth claims. Consider the following utterances:

> If you touch the stove, you will get burned.
> 
> I warn you not to touch the stove.

The first sentence seems like a truth claim, but it can be *used* as a
warning. The second is explicitly a warning, but it may be only the
*mention* of a warning previously given—in other words, it may be an
assertion that a warning was issued.

|            | Assertive                                              | Performative                                                             |
| ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Cognitive  | truth claim inviting only mental consideration         | stipulation or declaration entailing cognitive change (c.f. `let x = y`) |
| Discursive | truth claim inviting rebuttal, comment, or explanation | request for comment                                                      |
| Motive     | truth claim inviting listener to take action           | warning, command, specific call to action                                |

Consider, for example, the following sentence in each of the 6
Illocution×Expectation combinations listed in the preceding
table. This sentence does not name a speech act, so it demonstrates
the power and flexibility of the new Illocution×Expectation scheme.

> There is toilet paper on your shoe.

|            | Assertive                                                            | Performative                                                        |
| ---------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Cognitive  | I claim there is toilet paper on your shoe.                          | Consider yourself informed that there is toilet paper on your shoe. |
| Discursive | Comment on the toilet paper on your shoe.                            | Isn't that toilet paper on your shoe?                               |
| Motive     | I claim there is toilet paper on your shoe, (do something about it). | Do something about the toilet paper on your shoe!                   |

Note the capacity here for making indirect, but clearly marked
commands and questions. Honestly this system is so alien to me that
I'm not sure if it will work, but it also manages to cover all the
bases I can think of.  Also note that you can turn those into explicit
commands and questions simply by adding the right verb, so instead of
"There is toilet paper on your shoe"+Performative+Motive, you could
easily say, "You clean your shoe"+Performative+Motive to make explicit
what you want your listener to do.


### Split Modality into Discourse & Content Levels 
> JEFF: Yeah, we really need wifi!
> 
> FRANKIE: Okay, let's not get carried away. We /need/ oxygen.
> 
> ELROY: We /have/ oxygen, we /need/ wifi!
>
> — *Queer Studies & Advanced Waxing (Community S6E4)*

There are 3 sorts of modality in language, of which only one is
content level. Epistemic and Deontic modality refer respectively to
the speaker's certainty about the content, and the
normative/desiderative force embodied by the utterance. Alethic
modality relates to the modality of the content itself. Since alethic
modality is not a discourse level category, it belongs elsewhere in
the scope order.

Consider a sentence like, "They can't have children", which might be
interpreted as any of the three kinds of modality enumerated above.

| Modality  | "They can't have children."                            |
| --------- | ------------------------------------------------------ |
| Alethic   | They (biologically) aren't capable of having children. |
| Epistemic | Evidence suggests they don't have children.            |
| Deontic   | They ought not/shouldn't have children.                |

For each of these kinds of modality, we need a minimum of 3 modal operators:
actuality, possibility, and necessity. We can add more specific modalities as
needed: however, other grammatical machinery can express affective distinctions
like, "I fear/hope they have children".

### Examples of intersection with Evidentials, Illocution, & Expectation

The Epistemic and Deontic modalities operate in tandem with other
discourse level categories.

Epistemic modality is associated with Evidentials—it expresses the speaker's
commitment to the knowledge embodied in their claims: whether they judge that
something is necessary, possible, or actually the case.

Deontic modality works with Illocution and Expectation to convey the speaker's
needs and desires. 

**Intersection between modality types and other categories**
|                     | Alethic                       | Epistemic  | Deontic                 |
| ------------------: | ----------------------------- | ---------- | ----------------------- |
| actuality           | being, reality                | thinking   | is                      |
| possibility         | ability, capacity, capability | doubt      | should/may              |
| necessity           | need, requirement             | certainty  | must                    |
| Related categories: | [content categories]          | Evidential | Illocution, Expectation |

Example sentence:
> You must practice.

|           |                                                      |
|-----------|------------------------------------------------------|
| Alethic   | You need/require practice. [c.f. "You require air."] |
| Epistemic | (I am certain) you practice.                         |
| Deontic   | You must practice. [obligation/duty to practice]     |

#### Note: Modalities are modalities of judgment
Because there can be an epistemology of ethical judgments as well as an ethics
of epistemological states, there arises a question of the scoping of the
modalities. Now, there are three kinds of modality, each with three values,
meaning that there are nine of these modalizations. However we may also suppose
that we can stack them. Let's consider the math here: initially we can choose
one of 9 modalities, then we can choose one of 6, then one of 3 = 162
combinations.

So I propose a default scoping that could then be modified/evaded using some
sort of adjunct or particle, much like the ~~Ca~~ Organizational Affix with
stacking. Let's determine what the default scoping of the discourse level
categories shall be.

> I am certain I should want to fly.

How is this rendered? Well first let's say the speaker is not making a truth
claim. (I mean, they could be, but it's kind of pointless to make truth claims
about one's internal states.) So the Illocution is Performative.

> I must be certain that our prisoner committed the crime.

The speaker should be able to vary the scoping among these, but only in certain
parameters. For instance, Illocution must have the outermost scope.

> "I can say, 'The Moon is a moldy wheel of cheese'"

Now the **content** of this utterance is my capacity to make a certain
statement: I do not *actually* make the statement, but I predicate of myself
that it is (alethically) possible for me to do so. Illocution is for actual
speech acts (of either the Assertive or Performative variety). So the preceding
example requires a different wording.

> "The Moon may be a moldy wheel of cheese."

I mean not that the moon has this capacity (alethically), but rather that my
epistemic state does not preclude that state of affairs.

Possibilities:
1. A huge affix with 162 values for all combinations of scoping order;
2. Something like the Organizational Affix (i.e. stackable, possibly with an
   adjunct);
3. Implement an is-ought distinction: epistemic modalities only modify Assertive
   claims, whereas deontic modalities only modify Performative speech acts.



## Record of votes
| Vote | Name          |
| ---- | ------------- |
|   +1 | @porpoiseless |
|   +1 | @uakci        |
## Resolution
Draft.
## CC
A list of persons to CC about this RFC.
