---
title: RFC: Discourse as a tree
author: porpoiseless
---
## Problem

Conversation is messy and difficult to keep track of. It is easy to mistake
someone's offhand remark for an attempt at topic change, or a tangent or change
of topic for an conclusion drawn from the preceding topic.

Now, Ithkuil and TNIL have facilities for marking topic shifts and relations
between utterances. However, these are mostly affixes: a grab bag of tools with
widely divergent scope and power, but with the same morphological level of
salience.

## Duration

Time is an illusion. Language is eternal.

## Current State

Draft.

## Proposers

- @porpoiseless


## Detail

Let's provide the most sophisticated and usable discourse marking system
possible. 

## Proposal

In formal speech, utterances are marked for the conversational role they
serve. This somewhat resembles Ithkuil's Sanction, but it operates in a rigorous
way and presupposes less about the contents of discourse.

It would be more useful to express one's stance on the judgments involved in a
preceding or following statement, or parent.

### Conversation is like a ~~tree~~ graph

Because most of us are not mnemonic superhumans, this language doesn't need an
exhaustive set structural operations. What it does need is a systematization of
conversational transition phrases.

Conversations are rooted in a zero-topic node that is unmarked by any
utterance. We can think of this node representing the context and
conditions under which discourse occurs. Children of the zero-topic
node are known as "first level topics".


| operation                   | notes                      |
|-----------------------------|----------------------------|
| direct parent               |                            |
| last sibling                |                            |
| find ancestor               | direct ancestor must exist |
| find/create sibling         |                            |
| find/create child           |                            |
| find/create 1st level topic |                            |


### Morphology

At the moment I'm thinking this should be marked with a particle. 

### How does Expectation work with this?

- Imagine being in a meeting and asking someone to pass a glass of water.
- Or being told to "think about where we should have lunch" while doing
  something else.
- Pretty much any scenario where the topic of discourse need not mirror what is
  going on.

Expectation composes with these discursive marks.

### Utterance Intertext
A sentence identifies a topic and makes a comment on it. Subsequent sentences
may bear a variety of relations to the initial topic+comment pair.

- point in favor,
- point against,
- neutral/conflicted point,
- derived knowledge/elaboration on initial point,
- foundational critique/rejection of underlying premise,
- providing a different perspective/paradigm shift,
- example/narrowing down/specific case or sub issue
- abstraction/generalization/governing rule

There are probably type restrictions here too--point in favor/point against
really only works with propositions/assertions. Maybe in non-assertive contexts
they show the speaker's endorsement or censure of the preceding speech act.

## Record of votes

| Vote | Name          |
| ---- | ------------- |
| +1   | @porpoiseless |

## Resolution

Draft.

## CC

@uakci
