---
title: RFC: Development Roadmap
author: porpoiseless
---
## Problem

The semantics of a priori languages are often defined with complex, culturally
specific terms. But these words come loaded with conceptual baggage, historical
contingency, and oppositions both internal and external. They overlook the
diversity of other ways of conceiving ourselves and the meanings of our speech,
thought, and action.

* Words like "cognition" and "mental" are frequently used to define a word like
  "think", leading to circularity and obscurantism.
* Linguistic terms like like "Case" and "Aspect", may cover different semantic
  ranges across languages, and may be wholly unapplicable to others.
* Words for speech acts, which are highly dependent on the lifeways of a
  language community, may be baffling for outsiders who do not share that
  culture's system of values.

In short, our purposes require a great many words for describing how we think
and what we mean when we say something. This document outlines a roadmap for
making a language that is suitable for philosophical use outside of any given
culture. That is not to say *a culturally neutral language*, but rather, a
language built with a particular kind of culture in mind: namely a philosophical
one.

## Duration

Some time after now, for some time.

## Current State

Draft.

## Proposers

- @porpoiseless [Cetacean needed]

## Detail

Devil's in the details.

(TODO: cite Goddard's work on mental states and Wierzbicka's on enthnopragmatics
as specific instances where NSM can help us conceive of lexemes in more
fine-grained ways than the polysyllabic quasiclassical borrowings of English.)

## Proposal

### A Self Hosting Language

We call a language "self-hosting" if it contains some minimal, well-defined
subset that can completely describe the use and meaning of all the rest. In
practical terms: a self-hosting language can be used to write a complete grammar
and dictionary for itself, without resorting to circularity or the importation
of complex foreign terms.

Languages with this property benefit in many different areas:

- **(pedagogy)** We can teach such languages beginning with primitive,
  universally accessible concepts. Someone who has learned how speakers of this
  language talk about those concepts can in principle learn anything else about
  its meanings/uses in the language itself.
  
- **(documentation)** Instead of using polysemic English words--and more often
  than not, obscure Latinate coinages--we can use native linguistic terms as
  early as possible. [Our linguistics terminology is
  different](https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/OurTropesAreDifferent). We
  need not worry if we use a word like "mood", or "case" differently from its
  commonly accepted use and meaning among lay people, its technical use in the
  scientific community, or its specialized use among some particular school or
  discipline of linguistics.
  
- **(repair)** If a language can describe itself, speakers can use these
  facilities to correct miscommunications and make explicit the normative use
  and intended meaning of any linguistic structure.
  
###  Natural Semantic Metalanguage - Bootstrapping from a 65 Word Kernel

Fortunately, Wierzbicka and Goddard have already developed and tested a semantic
metalanguage of the sort we require. The Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM)
consists of 65 primitives, each with a set of allowed syntactic frames. A
self-hosting language must have ways of expressing these primitives and their
allowed combinations. More complex terms can be built and defined on this basis,
within the language rather than outside of it.

The following is a list of the semantic primes of NSM:

| Category                  | Primes                                                                          |
|---------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Substantives              | I, YOU, SOMEONE, PEOPLE, SOMETHING/THING, BODY                                  |
| Relational Substantives   | KIND, PART                                                                      |
| Determiners               | THIS, THE SAME, OTHER~ELSE~ANOTHER                                              |
| Quantifiers               | ONE, TWO, SOME, ALL, MUCH/MANY, LITTLE/FEW                                      |
| Evaluators                | GOOD, BAD                                                                       |
| Descriptors               | BIG, SMALL                                                                      |
| Mental predicates         | THINK, KNOW, WANT, DON'T WANT, FEEL, SEE, HEAR                                  |
| Speech                    | SAY, WORDS, TRUE                                                                |
| Actions, Events, Movement | DO, HAPPEN, MOVE                                                                |
| Existence, Possession     | BE (SOMEWHERE), THERE IS, BE (SOMEONE/SOMETHING), (IS) MINE                     |
| Life and Death            | LIVE, DIE                                                                       |
| Time                      | WHEN/TIME, NOW, BEFORE, AFTER, A LONG TIME, A SHORT TIME, FOR SOME TIME, MOMENT |
| Space                     | WHERE/PLACE, HERE, ABOVE, BELOW, FAR, NEAR, SIDE, INSIDE, TOUCH (CONTACT)       |
| Logical Concepts          | NOT, MAYBE, CAN, BECAUSE, IF                                                    |
| Intensifier, Augmentor    | VERY, MORE                                                                      |
| Similarity                | LIKE/AS/WAY                                                                     |

Some of the primes will have morphological exponents, but ideally all will have
lexical exponents as well.  Even if we can indicate `TWO` with the Dual Number,
we need to have a word to name *Dual* as a possible value of the category of
Number.

### Organizational sets in NSM

Many of the categories and values already tentatively present in the language
lend themselves to ready expression in NSM. For example tables for NSM
explications of the categories of Number, Composition, and Disposition are given
below.

| Number    | NSM               |
|-----------|-------------------|
| Non-Count | some of something |
| Singular  | one something     |
| Dual      | two somethings    |
| Plural    | many somethings   |

The NSM definitions for number end up being concise and easily understandable.
There's really no need to say more!

| Composition   | NSM                         |
|---------------|-----------------------------|
| Homogeneous   | things of the same kind     |
| Heterogeneous | things not of the same kind |

Note that because we have selected a parsimonious and general definition of
Composition, we need not make reference to "physical similarity", which would
preclude this category from describing non-physical things (except, perhaps,
metaphorically). By talking about "kinds" of things, we can use this category to
distinguish a collection of texts (or books, music, etc) by genre, regardless of
the physical appearance of these things (or even their *physicality*, in the
case of digital media).

(The table for Disposition is more complex since two binary distinctions are
involved. FreeTNIL terms are found inside the table, while NSM explications
compose the table's axes. And yes, these terms are horribly self-indulgent.)

| Disposition  | do one thing | do many things |
|--------------|--------------|----------------|
| in one way   | Dirigent     | Divergent      |
| in many ways | Convergent   | Frangent       |

Note that unlike Ithkuil's category of Affiliation, Disposition never changes
the underlying type of the set it modifies. While Coalescent Affiliation is
useful, it's a typing nightmare because it's the only value in its category that
can change the type of the set.

Connectedness poses something of a problem. I have reservations about using
`FAR`, `NEAR`, and `TOUCH`, as the basis for their definitions:

1. *Fused* Connectedness implies more than touching: it implies that the
   boundaries between the items have been disrupted--while the act of touching
   requires boundaries that can be in contact.
2. `FAR`, `NEAR`, and `TOUCH` impose a physical metaphor that might be ambiguous
   or inapplicable to some types. (They at least require that a distance
   function and boundary conditions be defined for set members). What does it
   mean if we say that two thoughts or feelings are "far from" or "near to" or
   "touching" each other?
3. Perhaps some kind of *logical* connectedness can be chosen for this category,
   rather than using a spatial metaphor. Maybe one that lets us give *Fused* a
   semantics of "parts of one thing", filling the gap left by Coalescent but not
   changing the type (since we're still referring to the parts, and not the
   whole).

Envelope proved difficult to analyze, and I wasn't satisfied with the
explications. I think this category, too, needs to be reorganized. Perhaps this
can be done with typing in mind: separating out the spatial from the logical
from the causal from the spatial from the temporal.

This and the general task of explicating the categories of FreeTNIL are the next
step in the roadmap.

## Concluding remarks

The path to a self-hosted language is clear.

1. Define our categories and their values in terms of NSM,
2. Create lexical items for NSM primes, at least those that aren't encoded
   simply in the morphology,
3. Define further terms in NSM, or in the subset of FreeTNIL that serves as
   exponents of NSM terms, or in some formalization isomorphic to NSM but with
   syntax highlighting,
4. Create on this basis terms for phenomenological states, speech acts, etc,
   needed for philosophical thinking.



## Record of votes

| Vote | Name          |
| ---- | ------------- |
| +1   | @porpoiseless |

## Resolution

Draft.

## CC

- @uakci
